# BLAST Working Group Website

This is the repository for the [BLAST working group website](https://jhublast.github.io/). It is built on [Hugo](https://gohugo.io/), using a heavily modified [Hugo Serif Theme](https://github.com/zerostaticthemes/hugo-serif-theme).

Source code for the website is contained in the `master` branch, and a Github Action will build the website to the `gh-pages` branch which is deployed via Github Pages. 
This action runs on push to `master` as well as every night at 5 AM UTC, which lets the Events page recategorize the Upcoming/Past events each day.

## Developing
There are three types of primary content: research, people, events. After installing Hugo, a new section of each type can be generated by running `hugo new <research/people/events>/<filename>.md`, which will populate a templated markdown file in `content/<research/people/events>/<filename>.md` that you can fill out. Without Hugo, you could just copy and paste an old markdown file from `content/` and edit it as needed. 

For example, to add a new event:
1. Run `hugo new events/<filename>.md` (I've been using `YYYYMMDD.md` as the filename where `YYYYMMDD` corresponds to the date of the talk.)
2. Navigate to `content/events/<filename>.md` and open the Markdown file in you preferred text editor.
3. Edit the `title`, `talkdate`, etc fields in the front matter, and add the abstract to the body. Note: the `date` field is auto generated for the time the file was created and is not used, so no need to change it. The `talkdate` field should be the datetime of the talk. If there is no speaker website, leave the field blank. If for some reason you do not want the event published immediately, you can set `draft` is to `true`.
4. If you would like to preview the changes locally, run `hugo server` to start a local version of the website.
5. Add and commit your changes, either to a branch to merge into `master`, or directly into `master`. 
6. Changes should appear live on the website in about 1 minute. You can monitor the status in the [Github Actions](https://github.com/jhublast/jhublast.github.io/actions) page (`deploy-to-gh-pages` is the website build by Hugo, `pages build and deployment` publishes to the live site. NOTE: If no events have been added for a while (e.g. over summer break), Github might make the workflow inactive, and you will have to manually reactivate them from the Actions page.



The templates are contained in the `archetypes/` folder if they need to be modified.

Images content belong in `static/`, content that uses images (people, research) can specify the image path (within the `static/`  folder) in the front matter.

All changes should by based and merged into `master`, not `gh-pages`. 

More advanced development, such as editing HTML/CSS/Hugo Templates to change formatting, is done in the `assets/` and `layouts/` folder.
