---
title: 'Spatial Factor Modeling: A Bayesian Matrix-Normal Approach for Misaligned Data'
date: 2022-03-11T18:45:11-05:00
talkdate: 2020-12-02T12:00:00-05:00
speaker: 'Dr. Lu Zhang'
speakerlink: 'https://luzhangstat.github.io'
speakeraffiliation: 'Columbia University'
draft: false
---

Multivariate spatially-oriented data sets are prevalent in the environmental and physical sciences. Investigators aim to model multiple variables, each indexed by a spatial location, jointly to capture spatial association for each variable as well as associations among the variables. We prefer multivariate latent spatial processes to drive the inference and allow better predictive inference at arbitrary locations. High-dimensional multivariate spatial data, which is the theme of this work, refer to situations where the number of spatial locations or the number of spatially dependent variables is very large. We propose frameworks to extend scalable modeling strategies for a single process into multivariate process cases. We pursue Bayesian inference which is attractive for full uncertainty quantification of the latent spatial process. Our approach exploits distribution theory for the Matrix-Normal distribution, which we use to build scalable versions of a hierarchical linear model of coregionalization (LMC) and spatial factor models that deliver inference over a high-dimensional parameter space including the latent spatial process. We illustrate the computational and inferential benefits of our algorithms over competing methods using simulation studies and real data analyses for a vegetation index dataset with observed locations in millions.
