---
title: "nnSVG: scalable identification of spatially variable genes using nearest-neighbor Gaussian processes"
date: 2022-04-11T10:24:45+09:00
talkdate: 2022-04-20T12:00:00-04:00
speaker: 'Dr. Lukas Weber'
speakerlink: 'https://lmweber.org/'
speakeraffiliation: 'Johns Hopkins University'
draft: false
---

Spatially-resolved transcriptomics enables the measurement of transcriptome-wide gene expression along with spatial coordinates of the measurements within tissue samples. Depending on the technological platform, this is achieved either by tagging messenger RNA (mRNA) molecules with spatial barcodes followed by sequencing, or through fluorescence imaging-based in-situ transcriptomics techniques where mRNA molecules are detected along with their spatial coordinates using sequential rounds of fluorescent barcoding. During computational analyses of spatially-resolved transcriptomics data, an important initial analysis step is to apply feature selection methods to identify a set of genes that vary in expression across the tissue sample of interest. These genes are referred to as 'spatially variable genes' (SVGs). These SVGs can then be further investigated individually as potential markers of biological processes, or used as the input for further downstream analyses such as spatially-aware unsupervised clustering of cell populations. Here, we propose 'nnSVG', a new scalable approach to identify SVGs based on nearest-neighbor Gaussian processes (NNGPs), which applies NNGPs in the context of spatially-resolved transcriptomics data. Our method identifies SVGs with flexible length scales per gene, optionally within spatial domains (subregions of the tissue slide), and scales linearly with the number of spatial locations. The linear computational scalability ensures that the method can be applied to the latest technological platforms with thousands or more spatial locations per tissue slide. We demonstrate the performance of our method using experimental data from several technological platforms and simulations, and show that it outperforms existing approaches. A software implementation is available from Bioconductor and GitHub.
