---
title: 'Scalable Bayesian inference using non-reversible parallel tempering'
date: 2023-02-24T16:31:21-05:00
talkdate: 2023-03-08T12:00:00-05:00
speaker: 'Dr. Saifuddin Syed'
speakerlink: 'https://www.saifsyed.com/'
speakeraffiliation: 'University of Oxford'
draft: false
---

Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods are the most widely used tools in Bayesian statistics for making inferences from complex posterior distributions. MCMC works by constructing a Markov chain stationary with respect to the posterior and averaging the statistics over its trajectory. In practice, for challenging problems where the posterior is high-dimensional with well-separated modes, MCMC algorithms can get trapped exploring local regions of high probability and fail to converge reliably in a finite time.

Physicists and statisticians independently introduced parallel tempering (PT) algorithms to tackle this issue. PT delegates the task of exploration to additional annealed chains running in parallel with better-mixing properties. They then communicate with the target chain of interest and help it discover new unexplored regions of the sample space. Since their introduction in the ’90s, PT algorithms are still extensively used to improve mixing in challenging sampling problems in statistics, physics, computational chemistry, phylogenetics, and machine learning.

The classical approach to designing PT algorithms was developed using a reversible paradigm that is difficult to tune and deteriorates performance when too many parallel chains are introduced. This talk will introduce a new non-reversible paradigm for PT that dominates its reversible counterpart while avoiding the performance collapse endemic to reversible methods. We will then establish near-optimal tuning guidelines and efficient black-box methodology scalable to GPUs. Our work out-performs state-of-the-art PT methods and has been used at scale by researchers to study the evolutionary structure of cancer and by the Event Horizon Telescope collaboration to discover magnetic polarization in the photograph of the supermassive black hole M87 and, most recently, to image Sagittarius A\*, the supermassive black hole at the center of the Milky Way.
