---
title: 'The Modified Ziggurat Algorithm for Skewed Shrinkage Prior'
date: 2023-10-16T11:49:46-04:00
talkdate: 2023-10-18T12:00:00-04:00
speaker: 'Yihao Gu'
speakerlink: ''
speakeraffiliation: 'Fudan University'
draft: false
---

Consortiums of health databases utilize standardized vocabularies to facilitate multi-institutional studies based upon their constituent data. However, synthesizing this heterogeneous clinical data is hampered by variation between ostensibly unified terminologies, with each constituent dataset providing a different set of clinical covariates. Notably, we observe ontological relationships among these covariates, and those related covariates likely contribute similarly to treatment decisions and health outcomes. Here, we extend the Bayesian hierarchical model framework by encoding ontological relations among covariates in the form of correlations in corresponding parameters. Additionally, to deal with the large number of covariates in the observational health databases, we introduce the skew-shrinkage technique. Such technique directs parameter estimates either toward the null value or informed based on the evidence supported by the data. We developed a modified ziggurat algorithm to address the computational challenges in updating the local-scale parameters under the skewed horseshoe priors. We demonstrate our approach in a transfer learning task, using a causal model trained on a larger database to improve the treatment effect estimate in a smaller database. 