---
title: 'Polygenic Risk Predication via Bayesian Bridge Prior'
date: 2023-03-29T09:45:01-04:00
talkdate: 2023-04-05T12:00:00-05:00
speaker: 'Yuzheng Dun'
speakerlink: ''
speakeraffiliation: 'Johns Hopkins University'
draft: false
---

Polygenic Risk Scores (PRS) have shown great promise in predicting the genetic variation in complex human traits and diseases. Although a series of methods have been proposed to construct PRS, their relative performance varies a lot by not only the genetic architectures of the traits/diseases, but also the training GWAS sample size and LD reference panel. There is still a strong need for novel methods that have more flexible assumptions for effect size distribution and are less sensitive to the sample size of LD reference panel. We introduce PRSBridge, a Bayesian method for developing PRS based on GWAS summary-level association statistics and external reference panel for estimating linkage disequilibrium (LD). PRSBridge places a continuous shrinkage prior, Bridge prior, on SNP effect size distribution to accommodate varying genetic architectures. A prior-preconditioning conjugate gradient method is implemented to provide an MCMC algorithm with substantial computational advantages. Low rank approximation of LD matrix makes our method robust to the LD reference panel especially when the reference sample size is small. Our analyses on six continuous traits in UK Biobank further demonstrate the improvement of prediction power of PRSBridge over two most commonly implemented methods, LDpred2 and PRS-CS, on average.
