---
title: 'Challenges and opportunities in the analysis of joint models of longitudinal and survival data'
date: 2024-05-06T16:06:09-04:00
talkdate: 2024-05-15T12:00:00-04:00
speaker: 'Dr. Eleni-Rosalina Andrinopoulou'
speakerlink: 'https://www.erandrinopoulou.com/'
speakeraffiliation: 'Erasmus University Medical Center'
draft: false
---

The increasing availability of clinical measures, such as electronic medical records, has enabled the collection of diverse information including multiple longitudinal measurements and survival outcomes. Consequently, there is a need to utilize methods that can examine the associations between exposures and longitudinal measurement outcomes simultaneously. This statistical approach is known as joint modeling of longitudinal and survival data, which typically involves integrating linear mixed effects models for longitudinal measurements with Cox models for censored survival outcomes.

This method is motivated by various clinical scenarios. For instance, patients with Cystic Fibrosis, a genetic lung disorder, face risks like exacerbation, lung transplantation, or mortality, and are regularly monitored with multiple biomarkers. Similarly, patients recovering from stroke undergo longitudinal assessments to track their progress over time. Although these outcomes are biologically interconnected, they are often analyzed separately in practice.

Analyzing such complex data presents several challenges. One key challenge is accurately characterizing patients' longitudinal profiles that influence survival outcomes. It's commonly assumed that the underlying longitudinal values are associated with survival outcomes, but sometimes specific aspects of these profiles, like the rate of biomarker progression, affect the hazard differently. Choosing the right functional form for this relationship is crucial and requires careful investigation due to its potential impact on results.

Another challenge arises from the high dimensionality of some datasets, such as registry data. Analyzing such comprehensive datasets using complex methodologies can be computationally expensive. Therefore, there's a demand for algorithms capable of distributed analyses that can concurrently and impartially explore multiple correlated outcomes.

In this presentation, we will explore strategies to tackle these challenges effectively.

