---
title: 'Backwards sequential Monte Carlo for efficient Bayesian optimal experimental design'
date: 2024-11-12T13:12:54-05:00
talkdate: 2024-11-13T12:00:00-05:00
speaker: 'Andrew Chin'
speakerlink: 'https://chinandrew.github.io/'
speakeraffiliation: 'Johns Hopkins University'
draft: false
---

The expected information gain (EIG) is a crucial quantity in Bayesian optimal experimental design (OED), quantifying how useful an experiment is by the amount we expect the posterior to differ from the prior. However, evaluating the EIG can be computationally expensive since it requires the posterior normalizing constant. A rich literature exists for estimation of this normalizing constant, with sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) approaches being one of the gold standards. In this work, we leverage two idiosyncrasies of OED to improve efficiency of EIG estimation via SMC. The first is that, in OED, we simulate the data and thus know the true underlying parameters. The second is that we ultimately care about the EIG, not the individual normalizing constants. This lets us create an EIG-specific SMC method that starts with a sample from the posterior and tempers backwards towards the prior. The key lies in the observation that, in certain cases, the Monte Carlo variance of SMC for the normalizing constant of a single dataset is significantly lower than the variance of the normalizing constants themselves across datasets. This suggests the potential to slightly increase variance while drastically decreasing computation time by reducing the SMC population, and taking this idea to the extreme gives rise to our method. We demonstrate our method on a simulated coupled spring-mass system where we observe order of magnitude performance improvements.