---
title: 'Neural Networks for Geospatial Data'
date: 2024-10-07T13:13:08-04:00
talkdate: 2024-10-16T12:00:00-04:00
speaker: 'Wentao Zhan'
speakerlink: ''
speakeraffiliation: 'Johns Hopkins University'
draft: false
---

Geospatial data analysis has traditionally been model-based, with a mean model, customarily specified as a linear regression on the covariates, and a Gaussian process covariance model, encoding the spatial dependence. While non-linear machine learning algorithms like neural networks are increasingly used for spatial analysis, current approaches depart from the model-based setup and cannot explicitly incorporate spatial covariance. 

In this talk, we will first go through a brief introduction to geospatial modeling, and several machine-learning-style extensions, followed by a focused discussion on NN-GLS — a novel neural network architecture recently proposed by us. 

NN-GLS falls within the traditional Gaussian process (GP) geostatistical model. It accommodates non-linear mean functions while retaining all other advantages of GP, like explicit modeling of the spatial covariance and predicting at new locations via kriging. NN-GLS admits a representation as a special type of graph neural network (GNN). This connection facilitates the use of standard neural network computational techniques for irregular geospatial data, enabling novel and scalable mini-batching, backpropagation, and kriging schemes. 

Besides, we provide a methodology to obtain uncertainty bounds for estimation and predictions from NN-GLS. Theoretically, we show that NN-GLS will be consistent for irregularly observed spatially correlated data processes. We also provide finite sample concentration rates which quantifies the need to accurately model the spatial covariance in neural networks for dependent data.  Simulations and an application to air pollution modeling will be presented to demonstrate the methodology.