---
title: 'Efficient Bayesian Semiparametric Modeling and Variable Selection for Spatio-Temporal Transmission of Multiple Pathogens'
date: 2025-03-24T10:02:37-04:00
talkdate: 2025-04-02T12:00:00-04:00
speaker: 'Dr. Nikolay Bliznyuk' 
speakerlink: 'https://sites.google.com/site/nab36cornell/'
speakeraffiliation: 'University of Florida'
draft: false
---

Mathematical modeling of infectious diseases plays an important role in the development and evaluation of intervention plans. These plans, such as the development of vaccines, are usually pathogen-specific, but laboratory confirmation of all pathogen-specific infections is rarely available. If an epidemic is a consequence of co-circulation of several pathogens, it is desirable to jointly model these pathogens in order to study the transmissibility of the disease to help inform public health policy.

A major challenge in utilizing laboratory test data is that it is not available for every infected person. Appropriate imputation of the missing pathogen information often requires a prohibitive amount of computation. To address it, we extend our earlier hierarchical Bayesian multi-pathogen framework that uses a latent process to link the disease counts and the lab test data. Under the proposed model, imputation of the unknown pathogen-specific cases can be effectively avoided by exploiting the relationship between multinomial and Poisson distributions. A variable selection prior is used to identify the risk factors and their proper functional form respecting the linear-nonlinear hierarchy. The efficiency gains of the proposed model and the performance of the selection priors are examined through simulation studies and on a real data case study from hand, foot and mouth disease (HFMD) in China.
